We are living in the last of the last days.
That means soon we are going to face events that will test our integrity as never before.
Yes, now is the time that we need to be alert and decisive.
Now that's a similar situation to what our brothers found themselves in in the first century.
Yes, they had some dramatic events that faced them.
What were some of the events that early Christians had to deal with?
And how did Jesus prepare them to face those events?
And what does it mean for us today?
Well, first of all, I'd like you to imagine this scene.
We'll go back in time to nice and 933 CE.
Do you remember what happened on that day?
Jesus was mounted on a donkey.
And in your mind, can you visualize, you're with Jesus,
as he starts to go down the area from the Mount of Olives and the Kidron Valley looking up towards the city of Jerusalem.
What happens? The crowds start together.
More and more people.
People start throwing the garments on the road.
Others cut down branches and waved them around.
They call out, blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah's name.
The whole city is an uproar.
How exciting that would have been.
And yet at that exciting moment in his life,
Jesus started sobbing and crying.
Why? Let's turn to the record in Luke chapter 19.
Luke 19 and verses 41 through 44.
And here the Inspire account tells us that when Jesus got nearby,
He viewed the city and wept over it,
saying, if you, even you had discerned on this day,
the things having to do with peace.
But now they have been hidden from your eyes.
Because the days will come upon you when your enemies will build around you a fortification of pointed states
and will encircle you and besiege you from every side.
They will dash you and your children within you to the ground.
And they will not leave us stone upon a stone in you
because you did not discern the time of your being inspected.
What do we see from these verses?
Do we see the compassion Jesus had for those who would be killed when Jerusalem was to be destroyed?
Yes, he was envisioning the destruction that would occur in the year 70 CE.
He was moved by the emotions of that, so much so that he cried loudly,
not silently like he did when he was about to resurrect Lazarus, but audibly loudly.
Now what do we learn from this?
Well for a start we can see Jehovah's love for people as reflected in Jesus.
Jesus was very distraught thinking about what would happen to that city and its inhabitants.
And then in verse 44, what was the other thing that Jesus was distressed about?
That that was a time of judgment we might say or inspection.
Yes, even though Jesus was thinking ahead to future events,
he realized that they were missing the opportunity at that time to do something,
things that they needed to do to prepare for the future.
There's something else that we learn too.
Not only do we learn from the compassion that Jesus displayed,
which we should likewise display when we think about what's going to happen to this wicked world,
but also if Jesus had so much emotion and feeling about wicked people who are about to be destroyed,
how do you think he felt about his followers?
Do you think he wanted to prepare them?
Of course.
And that's why we're not surprised.
Two days later, why he took a side, his apostles, and gave them some instructions.
Let's turn it to the record in Luke chapter 21 and verses 20 through 22.
Jesus is recorded as saying,
however, when you see Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies,
now in this case, he's referring to 66, see,
then know that the desolating of her has drawn near.
Then let those in Judea begin fleeing to the mountains.
Let those in the midst of her, that's in the midst of Jerusalem, leave.
And let those in the countryside not enter into her or enter into Jerusalem,
because these are days for meeting out justice in order that all the things written may be fulfilled.
Did you notice that there were three groups of his followers that he was referring to?
He spoke about those who lived in Judea.
So that wasn't just Jerusalem, that was the surrounding area.
So they were told, get out of there, flee, go to the mountains.
Then he spoke to those who would be living in Jerusalem, and what did he say?
Leave the city.
And then the third group, those who would live in the countryside.
We know many people were farmers, and they lived in open areas doing agriculture.
Normally, what would be expected is if armies were to come to a certain area,
these people would flee into the fortified city.
So what Jesus told them to do was the opposite.
So no matter where his followers would be, whether in the countryside, in the city,
or in the general area, what was the common denominator?
Don't flee to the city.
Don't put your trust in Jerusalem.
Yes, Jesus was telling them what they needed to know before the events would occur.
Now, what really was the lesson that Jesus was impressing on these ones?
Well, although those he was speaking to at that time were Jewish,
they had to realize that Jerusalem was no longer the earthly seat of Jehovah's Kingdom.
They had to also realize that the temple was no longer the center of Jehovah's worship.
So Christians had to get those facts clearly in mind,
make their decisions at that time prior to the events that would come later.
Now, maybe we could illustrate it in a modern sense.
Many of us have had to face the issue with regard to blood transfusions.
When do you need to make your decision with regard to that?
Is it when you're in the ambulance, semi-conscious, in pain?
Is it like, oh, let me the DBA.
Can you read the fine print?
Or is it when you get into the emergency operating room?
And you start arguing with people and asking questions?
No.
We realize that now is the time that we need to make our decisions.
Then we need to live by those decisions.
And then if an emergency should occur, we'll be ready for that situation.
That was the lesson Jesus was teaching them.
Yes, the Christians back in the first century had to read themselves of any feelings of nationalistic pride.
Any feelings that Jerusalem was the city.
Otherwise, they would make the wrong decision.
This was especially true in the year 66C.
What happened in that year?
Well, let's consider a brief overview.
Most of us are familiar with what happened toward the end of 66C.
At that time, the Roman army under the leadership of Cestius Gallus attacked Jerusalem.
But unexpectedly, they retreated, allowing time for Christians in the city to flee Jerusalem.
Was that the only thing that happened in the year 66C?
No.
Let's look back in time to see what other events took place.
This will help us understand why Christians needed to be alert and decisive beforehand.
First, let's think about the background.
The Jewish nation was fed up with Roman taxation and corruption way back in Jesus' day.
But by the beginning of 66C, the situation was even worse.
The Roman governor of Judea, Cestius Flores, was totally corrupt and was notorious for his cruelty.
The spirit of rebellion was everywhere.
Judea was a powder keg ready to explode.
Around the spring of 66C, Flores planted the temple treasury in Jerusalem, stealing some 17 talents.
This caused the revolt among the Jews.
In retaliation, Flores ordered his soldiers to attack the rebels and allowed his soldiers to plunder hundreds of homes and to kill some 3600 Jews.
However, the Roman assault was repelled and Flores and his men retreated from the city.
If you were there at that time, how would you have reacted?
Would you have been outraged by Flores' action?
If you lived in the countryside, would you think the Romans may return and now is the time to flee to Jerusalem?
Christians needed to be alert and decisive.
Remember, Jerusalem was not important to Christians. It was not the place of safety.
What happened next?
Eleazar, the son of High Priest Ananias, gained control of the temple area.
He suspended the sacrifices offered to the emperor and then drove the remaining Romans out of the upper part of the city.
If you were there, would you have been proud?
Happy that the corrupt Romans were forced to leave?
Remember though, Jerusalem was not important to Christians. It was not the place of safety.
Christians needed to be alert and decisive and not distracted.
Then around July, August, Menahem, the leader of another Jewish faction,
overraned the Roman fortress of Masada and seized Roman weapons from there.
He then returned to Jerusalem and captured the Tower of Fortress of Antonia.
They said, fire to Herod's palace, the palaces of Agrippa and Bernice, as well as High Priest Ananias' home.
Then they ordered the murder of High Priest Ananias and his brother Isaachire.
Following that, they returned to the fortress of Antonia and massacred the garrison of Roman soldiers still there.
The city was divided and in uproar.
Do you see how easy it would have been to join sides with one of the factions?
Remember though, these events were not important to Christians.
They needed to be alert and decisive and not distracted.
Finally around November, Sestia's gallows, the governor of Syria, marched with his troops and camped about six miles from Jerusalem.
Even though it was the Sabbath day, the Jewish rebels streamed out of the city and made a hasty assault on the Romans.
The Romans retreated to Bethhoren and the Jews captured Roman supplies and weapons.
Agrippa sent two representatives, his personal friends to the Jewish rebels, to persuade them to lay down their weapons and to promise them diplomacy.
But the rebels killed one of the men and wounded the other.
Sestia's pursued the rebels to Jerusalem, camped at Mount Scopus for three days and then started to undermine the city wall and tried to set fire to the gate of the temple.
But then, for some unexpected reason, gallows and his army retreated.
Alert Christians in Jerusalem and Judea immediately acted decisively and fled.
The rebels chased the Roman army, inflicting considerable losses in both men and supplies and gallows ordered his soldiers to retreat.
After seven days, the Jewish rebels gave up chasing the Romans and pillaged the supplies left behind.
They returned to Jerusalem after eight days.
What was the situation in Jerusalem at that time?
Josephus says, in the face of the exhilaration which now seized Jerusalem, the spokesmen for peace with Rome were obliged to remain silent.
Even those opposed the war were swept along by the force of the circumstances.
Those who supported Rome left.
All the rest were won over to the side of the rebels, partly by force, partly by persuasion.
If you were there, what would you have done?
Many Jews started to flee to Jerusalem seeking refuge there.
But was it a safe refuge? No.
There was anarchy in the city, several Jewish political factions fought each other.
Eventually in 70 CE, Jerusalem was destroyed along with its temple.
But the Christians who were alert and decisive were safe, far away in Pella, on the other side of the Jordan River.
What do we learn from this brief review of the events of 66 CE?
It wasn't just one event, wasn't, but a series of events.
Were you amazed at how many events occurred in 66 CE?
And that was just a brief summary.
There were many divisive political and religious issues that could have been distracting to Christians.
So those Christians needed to remain focused on their hope.
They needed to remember that Jerusalem and its temple gave no security for them.
Why should we be so interested in all of this today?
Notice what else Jesus said as recorded at Luke chapter 21 verses 34 through 36.
But pay attention to yourselves, that your hearts never become weighed down, with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life.
And suddenly, that they be instantly upon you as a snare.
For it will come upon all those dwelling on the face of the whole earth.
Keep awake then, all the time making supplication, that you may succeed in escaping all these things that must occur,
and in standing before the Son of Man.
Jesus said that these things would occur on the face of the whole earth.
That means he wasn't just talking about Christians in the first century.
He was talking about us today.
Yes, we need to pay attention and be alert.
He also reminded us to make supplication, yes, to strengthen our relationship with Jehovah.
What does this mean for us today?
As we face the great tribulation brothers and sisters,
we don't know exactly all the details of what will happen.
But we do know that Jesus did not mean that we would have to flee one literal city or go to a certain mountain range.
How could we? We're scattered over the whole face of the earth.
But we do need to remember the same things that the first century Christians needed to remember.
Don't put out trust in the religious and political systems of Satan's world.
Why is this so vital?
Just as in 66 CE, today we see one event after another leading up to the final day.
Everywhere there is evidence of political instability and infighting.
Not only among nations, but also within nations.
Religious political and social issues, including abortion and homosexuality, have become divisive topics.
Scientific issues, such as global warming, have also become political issues.
Just as in the first century, we must take to heart Jesus' warning.
Don't take sides in the chaos that's happening all around us.
Yes, keep your focus on the Kingdom of Hope.
Remember, soon we will face events that will test our integrity as never before.
So what are the takeaway points?
Well, first of all, we realize that now is the time we need to make decisions and stick to those decisions.
Yes, we need to be absolutely determined not to put our faith and trust in worldly politics.
We need to remain neutral, always thinking of God's Kingdom.
We also need to remember that it's not just one event coming up in the future.
There can be a series of events all happening at the same time.
They could be distracting.
But if we have made up our decision now, we'll be ready for that time.
And also, we remember the need to keep our relationship strong with Jehovah God.
And we remember the compassion of Jesus.
So Jehovah and Jesus want us to be protected at that time.
So may we be determined to continue to be alert and decisive.